# 65C816 Frequently Asked Questions

This document will help answer some of the frequently asked questions regarding the 65C816 CPU and its use on the Commander X16.

## What is it?

The 65C816 is an 8/16 bit CPU and a followup to the 65C02 CPU (which itself is a successor to the original 6502.)

* 6502: used in computers like the Apple I, Apple II, Kim-I, Commodore PET, and many arcade systems.
* 65C02: fixes some 6502 bugs, turns undocumented opcodes into NOP, adds some new address modes
* 65C816: adds 16-bit operations, used in Apple IIGS and Super Nintendo Entertainment System

## Why do I want one?

Speed and convenience, mostly. While the CPU is slightly more complex to code for, it also
introduces 16-bit operations, which make math easier and also make data transfers faster.

In fact, bulk data transfers to VERA can run much faster: transferring 2 bytes in one 
operation not only makes an individual transfer twice as fast, but the CPU also performs
half as many transfers. So real world testing has shown that, with proper
setup, uploading data to VERA is almost 4x faster than 8-bit transfers. One of the 
recent changes to VERA specifically addressed this use case.

The other major update is the optional 16-bit index registers. By switching to 16-bit mode,
you can cover the full 64K address range of the X16 with ,X or ,Y indexed address modes.
Among other things, this makes it easier to work with larger data sets, pointers, and
strings in your programs.

Finally, things like BRL and the new stack functions (PEA, PEI, PER) make fully relocatable
code possible. Instead of JMPing to an absolute address, you can BRL to an _offset_. PER can
also simulate the JSR routine by pushing the PC onto the stack, like this:

```
         PER CONTINUE-1
         BRL SUBROUTINE
CONTINUE:
```

(Look for an upcoming "65C816 relocatoin guide" to understand the syntax and why we use
`CONTINUE-1` instead of just `CONTINUE`.)

## How do I get one?

The part number is W65C816S6PG-14. It is available at Mouser in the US.

* Mouser: https://www.mouser.com/ProductDetail/Western-Design-Center-WDC/W65C816S6PG-14
* WDC's Availability Grid: https://wdc65xx.com/where-to-buy

## Can I test the 65C816 without hardware?

Yes. The official Commander X16 emulator now supports 65C816 emulation. Starting it
up with the -c816 command line switch will activate '816 mode.

## How do I upgrade?

Upgrading is simple. 

* Update your X16's ROM and VERA to R47.
* Turn your computer off and remove it from power.
* Carefully remove the 65C02 chip and set it aside.
* Careflly insert the 65C816
* Plug the power supply back in and start your computer.
* When the computer starts back up, type HELP and confirm the 65C816 is detected.

After installing the 65C816, you can use the packaging the '816 came in for your 
65C02. Place that in a safe location in case you want to switch back.

## CPU Detection

The easy and quick way to detect the 65C816 is to use an opcode that evaluates to NOP on the 65C02. 

The REP and SEP instructions on the 65C816 both execute as a NOP on the 65C02. So you can use SEP
to set the Carry flag and then use BCS to skip to a 65C816 specific routine or BCC to skip to 65C02
specific routine. 

For example:

```asm65c816
detect_cpu:
    clc
    sep #$03  ; .byte $E2,$03
    bcs cpu_65c816
    ; do 65c02 stuff
```

The SEP instruction is $E2, which is a 2-byte NOP on the 65C02. Using $03 as the operand means that
even if the operand is evaluated as an instruction (may happen on a non-compliant 65C02 emulator), 
the operand will also be treated as a NOP.

